we are at a farm in the northeast of
Scotland it is what we term is a hill
farm this was brought to our attention
from a concern from a member of the
public we investigated what was actually
going on and our field officer realized
that this was actually quite a large job
we counted up to around 77 ponies
themselves and I mean they they have
been living a very natural life if you
like where they've been living in their
small herds they've been in fighting and
just recently with the boys wanting to
get their own mayor's and things but
where it's where it could be an idyllic
situation nature can be quite cruel and
nature does take care of its own as well
and if ponies are being bred and bred
and interbred then unfortunately these
ponies will in all suffer the
consequences and this is our major issue
here we want to make sure that the
welfare of these ponies are is paramount
we realize that this was not just a
straightforward you know taking a few
ponies and helping them we had to look
at the big picture here these ponies are
semi-feral some of them used to be used
as riding trekking ponies but as time
went on and through various
circumstances the herds just grew and
grew
we is world horse welfare felt that we
would prefer to try and sort the problem
out and the problem being the over
breeding and and eventually
interbreeding which is really a main
concern to us all so what we've decided
to do is that we will try and come in on
the premises gather up all ponies that
we can inherit into an enclosure and our
main aim is to try and control the
forward breeding
this will involve castration of all the
Colts and the stallions and we will also
be just looking at the general health of
all the ponies
this may include worming delousing and
trimming of their feet now this might
sound quite easy and straightforward but
we're looking at 2,000 acres plus of
Hill land that the ponies know extremely
well and for us humans not so well so
what we looked at is you know who would
be able to help us on this as you can
imagine a thousand acres a bit daunting
when you add on plus plus it is very
daunting so we were lucky to have very
close to Belle weed farm and a boy we
have a small charity called horseback UK
well two years ago we moved to a farm to
breed these horses these are American
quarter horses and I had a visit from
some friends and we are still serving
and just come back from Afghanistan we
were talking about the number of young
people getting hurt and the military and
having to transition out of the military
to civilian world and we thought we
could perhaps help in two ways one the
horses these types of horses are great
to write because they're calm and also
for guys that have gone through
amputation because the cueing is very
different as a very is minimal cueing so
you don't need two hands two legs and
the other thing is to reintroduce
veterans to the to the rural world and
to introduce serving military personnel
to the rural world and the opportunity
to exist for employment within it and
that could be anything from Rangers to
dry stone walling to conservation to
game keeping in this particular task
that will be asked to get involved in
there's map reading skills there's the
use of the ground because obviously we
have to come up around the ponies you
have to know where the winds coming from
so many of the skills the guys have
actually being taught in the military
are transferable it's just finding ways
of doing it so I think that this is a
very good example of how guys can assist
society as they recover and veterans can
use the skills that we've got to help
things are needed to do in the community
today where we've asked horseback UK to
come along with a couple of their horses
and some of their more experienced dry
eiders to actually come around and
intermingle with the ponies to see what
their reaction is to other horses coming
in but more importantly they will be
able to have a good look around on
horseback getting from the horses point
of view as well of where's all the nooks
and crannies of where they can escape
when we're trying to round them up so
it's really the first part of let's you
know search and recover our initial task
in is to really go out on the ground and
use the military skills that were pretty
much all trained with to use the ground
to our advantage
map read and heard the horses in and
take them down and bring them actually
down into a corral they're in a holding
area before they go through the process
through Dix back using guys on the
ground as kind of blockers were able to
stop the horses but on the horseback
we're able to push them down into that
area
give them the amount of land I think
it's doable
it's totally doable and it's absolutely
fantastic working with such a
well-established and fantastic charity
is a world horse welfare you know
working alongside we've come up and we
have done initial ground Ricky's had a
look mapped out coordinated the area and
now it's just putting implementing it
basically is getting out there and
bringing these these horses in the whole
idea of this is to curb the breeding to
reduce the numbers so that is a number
of ponies that the place can actually
sustain throughout the natural life of
the ponies the ponies themselves are
actually of quite good quality there are
of Highland types and these Highland
types could well do really good jobs
elsewhere in private homes so where our
task really is to curb the breathing and
make me try and get rid of some of the
ponies through probably an auction